wp3/Stanbol-FISE-alignment-with-OpenAnnotation.md, before:

# Fusepool P3: Stanbol's FISE alignment with OpenAnnotation

* **Authors**: Rupert Westenthaler, Sergio Fernández
* **Last modification date**: April 29, 2014
* **Status**: This documents is just an internal **draft** from the [Fusepool P3](http://www.fusepool.eu/p3) consortium

## Motivation

[Open Annotation](http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/) specifies an interoperable 
framework for creating associations between related resources, annotations, using a 
methodology that conforms to the Architecture of the World Wide Web. 

[FISE](http://stanbol.apache.org/docs/trunk/components/enhancer/enhancementstructure)
is the current enhancement structure used by [Stanbol](http://stanbol.apache.org). An
ontology defining all custom concepts and properties required for producing annotations.

Since Stanbol is currently [working in the 1.0 release](http://markmail.org/message/6dwwkwv7elmo6454),
it is the right time to address some major changes that will break backward compatibility. 
An the annotation model is one of the candidates. The project would be happy to get
contributions from Fusepool on such aspect.

This document is part of the outcomes of DSS23 from the [backlog](https://easybacklog.com/accounts/4748/backlogs/54217).

# Introduction

@@TODO@@

# Analysis

@@TODO@@

# Working Plan

@@TODO@@

# Open issues

@@TODO@@

# Conclusions

@@TODO

Commit message:

changing a bit the orientation of DSS23: should we have just one candidate?

wp3/Stanbol-FISE-alignment-with-OpenAnnotation.md, after:

# Fusepool P3: Stanbol's FISE alignment with Open Annotation

* **Authors**: Rupert Westenthaler, Sergio Fernández
* **Last modification date**: April 29, 2014
* **Status**: This documents is just an internal **draft** from the [Fusepool P3](http://www.fusepool.eu/p3) consortium

## Motivation

Since Stanbol is currently [working in the 1.0 release](http://markmail.org/message/6dwwkwv7elmo6454),
now it is the right time to address some major changes that will break backward compatibility. 
An the annotation model is one of the obvious candidates. The project would be happy to get
contributions from Fusepool on such aspect.

[Stanbol](http://stanbol.apache.org) currently uses 
[FISE](http://stanbol.apache.org/docs/trunk/components/enhancer/enhancementstructure),
a custom ontology defining all required concepts and properties for producing annotations
from content.

[Open Annotation](http://www.openannotation.org/spec/core/) specifies an interoperable 
framework for creating associations between related resources, annotations, using a 
methodology that conforms to the Architecture of the World Wide Web. Another potential
candidate could be [NIF](http://persistence.uni-leipzig.org/nlp2rdf/), a format that 
aims to achieve interoperability between NLP tools. And other candidates could be taken 
into account too.

This document is part of the outcomes of DSS23 from the [backlog](https://easybacklog.com/accounts/4748/backlogs/54217).

# Introduction

@@TODO@@

# Analysis

@@TODO@@

# Working Plan

@@TODO@@

# Open issues

@@TODO@@

# Conclusions

@@TODO
